Basics of Cryptocurrency

Introduction:
Blockchain technology is changing the world around us. At the time of writing this article Bitcoin, the poster boy of crypto currencies was priced around $50,000 USD, up from $18 just few years ago.  Many people are jumping into the crypto fab for many reasons, for some, it is to YOLO* [You only live once] their hard-earned money to potentially gain tremendous wealth, others just want to use and experience the underlining blockchain technology and of course, the memes. There are also many people who either hate crypto (Hello politicians!) or those who don’t want anything to do with it fearing any backlash/regulatory ban from their respective governments (Risk-averse yolks). This article shall explain to you the basics of cryptocurrency and the current financial & political environment surrounding this technology.
The future of decentralized technology is bright, and whether you’re interested in cryptocurrencies or in blockchain technology, knowing the basics of blockchain is a must. 

What is a Cryptocurrency?
So, let’s start with the basics:
A blockchain is basically a chain of blocks. Blocks contain digital information - picture them as digital blocks of Legos with digital information being added on after the other forming a chain which is public information.
In the case of a cryptocurrency blockchain like Bitcoin, inside each block is a series of Bitcoin transactions that have taken place within a certain timeframe. All the blocks together constitute Bitcoin’s blockchain and all the transactions that occurred since its creation are available to be viewed publicly. The underlining feature here is Decentralization. 
Decentralization means that the blockchain technology is not centrally stored in one location (like our traditional bank servers), rather it is distributed to all the systems connected to that blockchain throughout the world.

Cryptocurrency mining – Is it worth it?
 Certain people (who are called miners) around the world connect their PC/mining rig to a given blockchain and all the transactions of that crypto is passed through all these systems and such transactions are verified by these computer systems. They get rewarded in crypto coin just for simply connecting their computer systems. The blockchain software allows these people to mine and verify cryptocurrencies transactions by making the miner solve computational problem which allows them to chain together blocks of transactions (hence the term “blockchain”). So, to earn more cryptocurrency one must have a higher computational power, that way their system solves these computational problems faster. The reason this computational problem-solving process exist is to ensure everyone gets a fair chance to mine crypto tokens and that no one could cheat the system.
You can technically start mining crypto coins too, provided your systems has a great graphics card. Do google about popular mining pool software’s like Unminable or NiceHash if you wish to start mining, or you could buy an ASIC miner [A computer solely built to mine cryptos]. But remember, it is not advisable to mine crypto at home. The reason being that there are huge corporations worth millions who have mining rigs set up in gigantic factories to mine all popular cryptocurrencies. Here’s a picture of a mining rig:
 

You’d mostly get paid in pennies worth of crypto and the electricity cost will be expensive. Its very tough to compete against these large mining rigs. But if you wish to mine crypto tokens as a hobby do feel free to do it via mining pool software.

Why are cryptocurrencies popular now?
Cryptocurrencies were made with only one goal in mind, to replace all central banks and the traditional banking system that’s in place currently. Bitcoin, the first working example of blockchain technology, was invented as a response to the inefficiencies of centralized banking institutions. It was launched in 2009 immediately following the 2007/2008 financial collapse. The creator(s) of Bitcoin wanted to bring in individual autonomy within the monetary system without any external central influence.
To explain this further, let me explain the role of central banks and inflation. 
Central banks are given the task of keeping our financial systems and the economy stable. They also have the sole authority to print and issue legal currency notes in their respective countries. More the currency notes that the central banks print and inject into the economy, higher would be the inflation level. 
A reasonable and stable increase in inflation is actually good for the economy as it indicates growth. Unless the Reserve Bank of India prints money, we the citizens wouldn’t have enough physical currency notes to do our day-to-day activities.  This means that every year, all central banks just simply print currency notes and “create value” as our economy keeps expanding. 
Now here is the problem at hand – These currency notes have value only because our government deems it to be, remember at any day the government or the central bank can just take away the value of the currency. Legally they have the power to do it and once they do the currency note in your hand will become a worthless piece of paper. Remember the act of demonization of Rs.500 and Rs.1000 currency notes by the Indian government in 2016?
What many people don’t know or doesn’t focus too much on is how these central banks make money? I mean if their given the task of keeping an entire country’s economy and its inflation stable, they should have a lot of funding, right? 
They make money by, well there’s no other way to tell this – by printing money.
Since central banks have the sole authority to make currency notes, they simply take a special paper and print few logos on it and put in a number on that piece of paper (say 500) and voila! Now they have a currency note worth Rs.500.
In fact, it costs only Rs.2.65 to print one Rs.500 Indian currency note, meaning for every Rs.500 note printed, the RBI makes Rs.497.35 profit. Sounds like a neat business, right? 
Here’s a link to an article about the cost of making currency notes if you wish to know further:
https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/money-and-banking/50-500-notes-now-cheaper-to-print-10-20-100-pricier/article34021926.ece#:~:text=According%20to%20the%20information%20given,down%20to%20%E2%82%B91.22%20in
Now, any central bank like Reserve Bank of India functions like a typical organization, meaning somebody has to own it. In this case its owned by the government, which means that after all of the RBI’s expenses, the government gets to take all that money as profit to spend. Every year the RBI transfers between 99,000 crores to 1,23,000 crores to the Indian government. Here’s a link to the same:
https://www.moneycontrol.com/news/business/economy/rbi-to-transfer-rs-99-122-crore-surplus-to-government-6922011.html
Now while the RBI may make enormous amount of profit, they cannot just transfer the money to the government because the government will simply spend whatever money it has on pointless election campaign promises by that ruling party. 
If the money is transferred to the government, the government will spend it and that money will enter the economy and the RBI will have zero control over managing it. If such a scenario happens it will then cause hyperinflation (which is extremely bad for the country). Countries like Venezuela suffer from such issue. Do google about it and see for yourself. 
So technically the Central banks are supposed to release only the maximum allowable profits to the government which upon spending wouldn’t cause any negative effects on the inflation. The rest of the profits are kept within the RBI itself as a surplus which it carefully releases into the economy as and when its needed and appropriate. It is the duty of the central bank to keep inflation in check. But for the past few years, this never happens due to a fundamental flaw in our system – the ruling government appoints the Central bank governor, many are of the view that governors prioritizes the government’s needs over the economy’s needs. 
Many people around the world are of the view that most governments just want to print as much money as possible and extract them without any fear of inflation when they have huge election promises to fulfill and are facing a lack of revenue (like lower tax collection for that year or when they reach their borrowing limit).
There have been few incidences of this as well, when the entire world faced the pandemic in 2020, Most governments around the world just printed more money because they had huge expenditure and had almost zero tax revenue due to lockdowns. While in short-term they may have funds due to this act. In the long-term they have truly destroyed the wealth of the common citizens. 
Even before the pandemic on 2018 the then-governor of RBI Urjit Patel and the deputy governor of RBI quit their respective post after an alleged tussle with the government who meddled with the functioning of the RBI. The government back then who was on a lack of fund arm-twisted the central bank to give out its surplus for its expenses. Here’s a link to an article explaining about it:
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-46506275
This subtly happens in every single country, even in United States of America, the Federal reserve just prints and injects billions of worth of dollars into the economy every month. Such measures have been very helpful for the ruling party in the USA who has issued billions of worth of stimulus check to its citizens and are on track to pass a $3.5 trillion worth of an infrastructure spending bill. To give you an aspect that bill alone is worth more than the GDP of India and the US government does not have enough revenue in the form of tax collection to fund it. This clearly shows all governments are spending enormous amount of money without any accountability just to fulfill their election campaign promises and most central banks are failing in their duty to curb down these activities, even if they want to clearly the central banks have zero power over the government. This was the same behavior that caused the 2007-08 financial collapse. There are early signs that we will see a similar collapse of the traditional financial system due to the reckless spending of these governments, but only time will tell.
So, how to stop/escape from this potential impending doom? Enter cryptocurrencies.

What Cryptocurrency brings to the table:
Cryptocurrencies appeal to their supporters for a variety of reasons, whatever issues I have mentioned above, the cryptocurrencies solve it:
•	Cryptocurrency removes central banks from managing the money supply, since over time these banks tend to reduce the value of money via inflation.
•	The technology behind the blockchain ensures that it is a decentralized processing and recording system and can be more secure than traditional payment systems.
•	Its very easy to verify transactions in the blockchain network and the chances of a fraud is nil. This technology eliminates all the services given by the banks, and therefore eliminates the unnecessary charges that banks charges the common consumers.
At the current scenario, holding crypto is the perfect hedge to secure your wealth. Plus, since more and more use of use of blockchain is being developed, the value of crypto tokens will only get higher. Due to the pandemic and the reckless spending of various governments, many people are storing some portion of their wealth in cryptocurrencies. 
Plus, cryptocurrency helps to transfer funds as the cost is very cheap. For e.g., if you study in abroad say in the United Kingdom, and if your parents living in India wish to transfer money to you, traditionally they have to send the money through many intermediaries who separately charge transaction fee throughout the transfer process. It’s very expensive simply because of the fact that you send money from one country to another. But if you make the same transfer via a cryptocurrency token, it eliminates all these intermediaries and the transaction fee is very cheap. These are just some of the features of a cryptocurrencies. There are many more and the opportunities is extremely huge when it comes to innovating the financial system.
Political Aspect of Cryptocurrency:
So, with so many advantages of a cryptocurrency, almost every single government, banks, billionaires like Warren buffett seem to hate its growing popularity. Let us try to understand the reason for the same:
1.	Governments just love the way they control the national currency and does not want a private currency to replace it. They feel it is a threat to their ‘sovereignty’.
2.	Central Banks hate cryptocurrency because it undermines their role severely, actually the main purpose of crypto is to eliminate the role of central banks.
3.	Banks hate cryptocurrency because that technology makes the entire banking industry irrelevant.
4.	Billionaires like Warren Buffett hate it because he’s invested deeply into the banking sector and any loss on that industry is his personal loss in wealth. Plus he’s a boomer, what else do you expect?
As per the law in majority of the countries around the world including India, that the national currency is the only legal tender that can be used for any transactions. Hence to use cryptocurrencies as a “currency” is illegal. Meaning you cannot use it to buy goods or services.
How does the cryptocurrencies bypass the local laws? Why do people still invest in cryptocurrency if its still illegal as a currency?
Well, here’s the explanation on how supporters of blockchain technology are smart at snubbing the government. Most of these people classify crypto as an asset and not as a currency even if the name itself says “cryptocurrency”. Legally it is allowed to be held as an asset like owning a stock in the stock market and the government cannot do anything about it. As long as we don’t use it as a currency, the government cannot ban it, at max they can regulate it (I don’t know how one can regulate a decentralize system though). That is why when RBI banned cryptocurrencies in 2021 the supreme court simply quashed that ban order. 
See article: https://www.indiatoday.in/business/story/supreme-court-quashes-rbi-ban-on-cryptocurrency-1652254-2020-03-04
 One common sensitive issue that’s prevalent among all politicians is job-creation. Almost every country has this issue and India is no exception. The pandemic certainly made this issue worse, but now the crypto-industry, backed by deep-pocketed Venture Capitalist have been on a hiring spree throughout 2020-2021. At the date of writing this article the Indian government is yet to pass a bill on regulating this industry, while the industry has been expanding tremendously.  According to the report issued by IT industry body NASSCOM about 50,000 people are employed in this sector with a scope to create over 8 Lakh jobs by 2030. 
India currently has over 10 Crore people who have invested in cryptocurrencies, that’ 7.09% of the total Indian population. India is the highest in the world followed by USA and Russia when it comes to the total number of citizens who have invested their money in cryptocurrency. 
Since this crypto-sector is ever-evolving with innovation, its very tough for the governmental officials to establish regulations. But what’s mostly certain is that the government will not completely ban this industry since it will have ripple effects both in unemployment and the economy. 

Conclusion:
Cryptocurrencies are extremely volatile assts with no regulation or backing from the government. Care must be taken on how you invest in these assets if you choose to do so. The financial and political situation looks extremely volatile yet promising. It may not be used as it was intended but way too many people are invested in this technology and its here to stay. What’s interesting to note is that its still in its early stage and one can still take advantage of this once in a lifetime opportunity by investing early.



 






